DR Update devkit architecture (#761)
blindnet-io/product-management: decisions/DR-update-devkit-architecture.md

# Update devkit architecture

> | Status      | draft |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Status      | accepted |
```

| :---------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | **PR #**    | []() |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **PR #**    | [761](https://github.com/blindnet-io/product-management/pull/761/) |
```

| **Author & Sponsor** | [Marko](https://github.com/m4rk055) (marko@blindnet.io) |
| **Reviewers** | [Milan](https://github.com/milstan), [Amaury](https://github.com/TheKinrar), [Justin](https://github.com/jboileau99) |
| **Assignee** | [Milan](https://github.com/milstan) |

## Context and Problem Statement

The model described in the [PRIV](https://github.com/blindnet-io/product-management/blob/devkit-schemas/refs/schemas/priv/RFC-PRIV.md) document requires the [Privacy Compiler](https://github.com/blindnet-io/product-management/tree/main/refs/high-level-architecture#privacy-compiler) to be aware of every [Data Captures and Capture Fragments](https://github.com/blindnet-io/product-management/tree/main/refs/high-level-architecture#privacy-compiler) in the system.
That puts a burden on the implementing system to
- make sure every data point collected by the system is as well referenced (metadata) in the Privacy Computation Engine database
- collect or transform data to a particular format (capture and fragments)

> This DR proposes removing the notion of Data Captures and Capture Fragments from Privacy Computation Engine.

Reviewer: I like the idea of removing it from PCE but not necessairly in general. That way we make the components operate with minimal information which is sane.

Author: It stays in the Capture Component, removing it just from the PCE.

## Proposal

The [Privacy computation engine](https://github.com/blindnet-io/product-management/tree/main/refs/high-level-architecture#privacy-computation-engine) (PCE) should have the following components:
- Privacy Compiler
- Privacy Request Capture Interface
- Data Consumer/DPO Interface
- Data access engine
- Data storage connectors (for e.g. Postgres, MongoDB, Azure Storage)

> **Data access engine** is a component deployed by a client. It communicates with the **Privacy Compiler** and a **Data storage connector**.

Reviewer 2: Seems to me like the Data access engine serves no purpose other than relaying requests from compiler to storage connector, we could probably remove it?

Or, if we want it to have some important roles, we should probably specify it. I see how it might be useful to have it as a common interface for all parts of the Privacy engine (and even whole devkit) that prevents having to directly communicate with the storage connector, but I'm not sure, the storage connectors must implement a common API that we define.

Author: It might do some additional work like scheduling tasks for the connector. I'll think about the complete scope of it's operations and if it's useful to have it as a separate component.

Reviewer: with regards to Data Access Engine there is also a need (that we have to accoutn for) when replying to an ACCESS request, to fetch and display data to the Data Subject.

@TheKinrar @m4rk055 I think we simply, now, have insufficient information on how to best organise the the connection with client storage. The best way to do it will become clear as we start developing, so I suggest we settle here on a temporary, good enough for now definition, and then we'll update later.

Reviewer 2: What we have here is good enough in terms of precision, we can use the other DR in #748 to then define the technical specifics as we previously did. This is not about how it actually works, only about the roles of the components. This is why I still believe it's useful to know if a component is needed

A **Data storage connector** is a component that has mappings that queries the data storage. It can be implemented by blindnet or by a client for an unsupported storage or if the data model is not suitable.

> It should containg a set of rules (mappings) on how to map a `selector` to a corresponding fetch query (`selector` to a e.g. table column in a relational database). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It should containg a set of rules (mappings) on how to map a `selector` to corresponding queries (`selector` to a e.g. table column in a relational database). 
```

We'll have other types of queries than just fetching data, there's some deletions for sure, maybe some updates?

PCE is [configurable](https://github.com/blindnet-io/product-management/blob/2645056f4477a93b5a6635129c77a3e7fe4d9a9b/refs/schemas/priv/expected-behavior.md#configuration-and-prerequisites) with the following:
- Parameters for `TRANSPARENCY` requests
- `selectors`
  - retention policies for every `selector`
  - `privacy scope` for every `selector`
- Legal bases with privacy scopes
  - necessary
  - contracts
  - legitimate interests
  - consent templates (default consents)
- Regulations

> Regulation is defined as `(privacy scope)-(legal base)` which means data in `privacy scope` can only be processed if a user has the active `legal base` (e.g. has given consent).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regulation is defined as allowed `(privacy scope)-(legal base)` pairs which means that for data in `privacy scope` to be processed under this regulation, the Data Subject MUST have an active `legal base` included in those pairs.
```
A regulation may allow several legal bases for a particular type of data (mandate at least one out of several), not just one.

> A new user can be created in the PCE in the following ways:

Reviewer 2: Does that mean we store users in the PCE? Do you mean only user IDs exist there, or other data too? In the "current" architecture, Identity handles user authentication and I think we can keep that

Author: From the [PRIV doc](https://github.com/blindnet-io/product-management/blob/2645056f4477a93b5a6635129c77a3e7fe4d9a9b/refs/schemas/priv/RFC-PRIV.md#globally-unique-data-subject-identities), we store `dsid` (user id) and `dsid-schema`.

- manually, with a request
- upon giving a consent
- upon making a privacy request

By default, the user's eligible privacy scope is composed of privacy scope triples from `necessary`, `contracts` and `legitimate interests` legal bases, with regards to all `Regulations`. Every subsequent consent or privacy request will change the user's eligible privacy scope.

### TBD Retention policy

Since metadata can't be accessed by a privacy compiler, handling retention policies becomes a tricky problem.
Data access engine can handle them by querying the storage on fixed intervals. That might put burden of additional development on a client.

> 

Reviewer: Can't the client also provide some sort of mappign between Retention Policy Events, and storage data/matadata so that PCE can generate queries and to check for expired data?

Author: That's how I imagined it to work.

Reviewer: so what is the problem then?

Reviewer 2: it's not a problem really, only it's more complicated than it used to be when the storage was handled by the devkit. the mapping (data access / storage connector) needs to handle relatively complex queries (not just "get this data with this ID", but also "all the data matching this expiry criteria"), that's it

Reviewer: > the mapping (data access / storage connector) needs to handle relatively complex queries (not just "get this data with this ID", but also "all the data matching this expiry criteria")

It's obvious to me that when working with relational databases, this _mapping (data access / storage connector)_ is more complex then when we have a capture/fragment-aware storage. The clients adopting our storage will benefit from a more elegant (and maybe easier to configure) solution. That's ok.

The key requirement here is that the PCE MUST be agnostic to the type of storage used. It communicates with an interface general enough to abstract both this and the future storage we'll make (with captures and fragements)

### TBD Provenance

> Privacy compiler should also be aware of data transfers between the systems, which includes knowing about the ids of the transferred data.

Reviewer: I think when transfer happens, it is quite a heavey operation, and anyway the System needs to reach out to the PCE to let it know that the data about the user is being trasnfered. So it is not such a great overhead to require data IDs in this particular case.
